readme.md, before:

# Working with Ansible

Last updated: 06.09.2020

## Purpose

The purpose of this document is to show how to install and work with ansible.

## Prerequisites

### For Fedora users

Fedora 27 or newer.

### For Windows users

Windows 7 or newer.

### Installation

#### Installing Python 3 on Windows
1. Download the executable for Python 3.8.0
[here](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.8.0/python-3.8.0-amd64.exe).
1. Run the executable.
1. Open up a terminal
1. Type `python3.8 --version`
1. The output should show you are running Python 3.8.0.
1. If you see a different version, you might have to set the **PATH** variable

#### Installing Python 3 on Fedora
1. Open up a terminal
4. sudo dnf install python3.8
1. Type `python3.8 --version`
1. The output should show you are running Python 3.8.0

### Instructions

1. Open up a terminal
1. Navigate to a directory where you plan on putting your
python virtual environments.

    :warning: You must always work out of a virtual environment.
    Virtual environments prevent you from corrupting
    your default system virtual environment and allow users to install different
    software for each virtual environment.

1. Run `python3.8 -m venv venv_ansible`
1. To activate your virtual environment on **Windows**, you run
`./venv_ansible/Scripts/activate`
1. To activate your virtual environment on **Fedora**, you run
`source ./venv_ansible/bin/activate`
1. Run `python --version`.  This is the version of Python running in your
virtual environment.
1. Run `pip install --upgrade pip`
1. Run `pip list`.  This should list the modules currently installed in your
environment.  Notice how ansible is not present.
1. Run `pip install ansible==2.9`.  The command installs **ansible 2.9** in the
virtual environment
1. Run `pip list` to confirm **ansible 2.9** is installed.

Under Construction....

Commit message:

add instructions to create a vm as a prerequisite

readme.md, after:

# Working with Ansible

Last updated: 06.09.2020

## Purpose

The purpose of this document is to show how to install and work with ansible.

## Prerequisites

### For Fedora users

Fedora 27 or newer.

### For Windows users

Windows 7 or newer.

### A Running VM

You can create your VM anyway you want.  

One option is to use Terraform to create an Amazon EC2 instance (VM).
I have instructions at setting up your environment in the
[terraform for beginners git repo](https://github.com/bretmullinix/terraform-for-beginners).
In the repo be sure to follow the instructions in the
[readme.md](https://github.com/bretmullinix/terraform-for-beginners/blob/master/readme.md)
and the instructions in the
[ about how to inject your private key into an ec2 instance](https://github.com/bretmullinix/terraform-for-beginners/tree/master/injecting-your-ssh-key-into-ec2-instance).

### Installation

#### Installing Python 3 on Windows
1. Download the executable for Python 3.8.0
[here](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/3.8.0/python-3.8.0-amd64.exe).
1. Run the executable.
1. Open up a terminal
1. Type `python3.8 --version`
1. The output should show you are running Python 3.8.0.
1. If you see a different version, you might have to set the **PATH** variable

#### Installing Python 3 on Fedora
1. Open up a terminal
4. sudo dnf install python3.8
1. Type `python3.8 --version`
1. The output should show you are running Python 3.8.0

### Instructions

1. Open up a terminal
1. Navigate to a directory where you plan on putting your
python virtual environments.

    :warning: You must always work out of a virtual environment.
    Virtual environments prevent you from corrupting
    your default system virtual environment and allow users to install different
    software for each virtual environment.

1. Run `python3.8 -m venv venv_ansible`
1. To activate your virtual environment on **Windows**, you run
`./venv_ansible/Scripts/activate`
1. To activate your virtual environment on **Fedora**, you run
`source ./venv_ansible/bin/activate`
1. Run `python --version`.  This is the version of Python running in your
virtual environment.
1. Run `pip install --upgrade pip`
1. Run `pip list`.  This should list the modules currently installed in your
environment.  Notice how ansible is not present.
1. Run `pip install ansible==2.9`.  The command installs **ansible 2.9** in the
virtual environment
1. Run `pip list` to confirm **ansible 2.9** is installed.
1.
